Now, these versions of the verb that we get after aberr, and we said that it's any version of Aber.
Whether it's e, whether it's abia, whether it's a briya, we could even say I will have.
I will have lost it.
Lo abre perdido.
Any version of Aber, we will have the adoido version afterwards, even if it's in the two form.
We could say something like, I would like to have gone.
I would like to have gone.
I would like, it would please me
Me gustaría to have gone.
It would please me to have gone.
I would like to have gone.
Me gustaría haber ido.
So even after the two form we're having just one version of the verb that can come after aber
Now this version of the verb that can come after a ber is very useful because if it makes sense we can use it as an adjective.
just as we can in English.
For example, in English we say I have sold.
And salt we can use like an adjective.
We can say it is sold.
We say I have lost and we can use it like an adjective, I am lost.
And you can do the same in Spanish
Which gives you hundreds and hundreds of words now that you can access as adjectives.
So for example, to close is serar, serar
Serrar.
How would you say I have closed it?
I have closed it.
Lo eserado.
Good.
Lo eserrado.
You might be referring to the door, which is La Puerta.
So if you were referring to the door, how would you say that I have closed it?
La he cerrado.
Good.
So cerrado, we can take that and we can use it as an adjective.
Now it doesn't change ever after a bear, it's always cerrado, lo eserrado, la eserrado, lo hemos cerrado.
But when it's an adjective, when it's behaving like an adjective, then of course it can change.
So if you say it is closed and you mean the door, how will you say it?
Cerrada.
Good.
So how would you say that?
It is closed
Do you think to be closed is a state or a characteristic?
Esta cerrada.
In fact, the great majority with just a couple of exceptions of these adjectives that we get from ad o ido, that we get from the version that comes after aber, go with a star.
With this particular type of adjective, we don't need to really think about whether it's a state or a characteristic.
They're just gonna go with a star with a couple of exceptions.
To lose was
Perder.
What is the version that comes after a ber, after any form of a ber?
Perder becomes perdido.
Perdido.
So how do you say I am lost?
Estoy perdido or female perdida.
Good.
Estoy perdido or for feminine perdida.
What was to finish or to terminate?
Terminar terminar how do you say I have finished?
E terminado.
Good.
So now you can also say it is finished and use it like an adjective.
Está terminado.
Good.
What if you were referring to the movie which is La Pellicula?
Está terminada.
Good.
So this gives us a lot of adjectives we can access.
Let's have a look at some of them.
To sell was vendor and then sold would be Vendido.
Good.
They are sold
Están vendidos.
How will it sound?
Están vendidas.
Good.
Some of the adjectives that we already met are actually adjectives that were formed in this way.
How was the word for tired?
Cansado.
And this comes from the verb cansar to tire.
So cansar is to taya and then cansado is the version that you get after Aber and it's the adjective
cansado tired so if you want to say I get tired I tire myself so now it's present
Me canso.
That means I get tired or even I get fed up.
How would you say I have tired myself?
And like I said, it doesn't literally mean that you are responsible for tiring yourself.
Just means you've you've got tired or you can use it like I've had enough.
So I have tired myself.
Eh.
Me he cansado.
Good.
I have gotten tired
I've gotten fed up good.
And then cansado, which is the version of cansar after aber, is also of course the adjective tired.
I am tired
Estoy cansada.
Good.
So to close is serrar, and we said that closed is serado
And we said that these ado-ido adjectives with a couple of exceptions go with a star.
So how do you say it is closed?
Good.
How would you say he is closed to the idea?
Idea is the same word in Spanish.
He is closed to the idea.
What gender does it look like idea?
La idea.
He's closed to the idea.
But if you want to say he's a closed person, you mean as a person he's closed, how do you think you would say it
Almost.
This is exactly the structure that we want.
Well done.
But the word for person is feminine.
And it doesn't refer to anybody specifically, just the word itself is feminine
Es una persona cerrado.
Cerrada.
Good.
Refers to person.
Very good.
Es una persona cerrada.
So that's how we can get around that if we want to say he's closed.
and we mean he's a closed person.
If we just say es cerrado, it sounds like a mistake.
But es una persona cerrada is fine because es is going with persona.
What you're saying essentially is he is a person that is closed.
is una persona serrada.
How would you say she is lost
Está perdida.
Good.
She's lost.
But if you want to say she's lost, you know, as a person, she's lost her way.
Is una persona perdida.
Well actually why not a star?
It's in this structure you're saying she is a person.
You're not looking at lost person, you're looking at person.
The adjective is totally secondary.
So when you say this is a chair.
You're gonna use sir.
If you're gonna say it's a wet chair, even though that is a state, you're still gonna use ser because what you're saying is it's a chair.
The adjective is secondary.
But if you say it is wet,
Then you use a star.
So che or seat is siya.
Siya.
Silla.
Good.
Mohar mohar means to wet.
Mohar.
Now how do you think you say wet as an adjective?
Mojada.
Good.
For silla, mojada in feminine.
So how would you say the chair?
La silla.
The chair is wet.
La silla está mojada.
Good.
But if you say it is a wet chair
You're just saying it is a chair and then the adjective is secondary and the fact that it is a chair is about as characteristic as it gets.
So you're saying it is a chair
Es una silla wet.
Mujada.
Es una silla mojada.
So when we say something is a noun, when we give it its name, there's nothing more characteristic.
Es una persona, it is a person, it is a happy person, es una persona feliz.
It's a chair.
Esunasia.
It's a wet chair.
Esunasia mojada.
The structure there is it is a chair.
The adjective is secondary.
But when we say the chair is wet, then we are talking about a state of the chair with ease.
La sia sta mohada.
Good.